Welcome! In this lecture we are going to be looking at how we can print this
game over message, [Laughs] for finally some closure for this poor player, who has to keep playing
on and on and getting his way home. And
we're also, in the process of this, going to be learning about boolean variables
and recapping a little bit about ifs and elses and
if and else statements. Let's dive right in!
So one thing you might have noticed from last time is that obviously this vector
is not a number of meters away from home. So I want to
introduce you to a new field that
vectors have, and one way you could have discovered this is by hitting the
dot. And then, you see that there's all these things that you can
call on this field,
I mean on this vector. So we have lots of different
things and we don't understand all of them just yet, but there's x and there's y,
so that's interesting but also there's this magnitude.
Now what does magnitude mean? Magnitude means, what is the
length of the vector, excluding it's direction? So if we go with that,
and if we just put our mouse over, we see that what we get back is a float
not a vector anymore. So if we hit play...
...
...and then we hit our arrows around,
you see now what we're getting
is actually how many meters away from home we are. And this
is starting to get quite interesting, because you can see I'm getting
farther away, then I'm getting closer again, then I'm getting closer
and closer and then I'm far away again. So 5, I'm
going around, I'm trying to find my way home. And how do I
find my way home, etc.?
And eventually, after a long time, I manage to actually get
there, after a very many steps as you can see here.
That was a bit silly! I
could have done that lot quicker, that was a bit of a dumb way of
doing it. However, you can now see that we
are actually playing a fun game, but one thing
that is not so fun about this game is that it doesn't actually end.
There's no game over message saying well done, you've made it in [Laughs] 100 or 53
steps all the way back home! So what
we need to do is introduce that. Now, to
introduce that, I want to take you first back to the idea of
a boolean variable. So that is
a variable that can hold true and false values.
So let me show you what I mean by putting some more print
statements in this welcome message. So
the type is bool and I'm going to call it gameOver,
because that's what we're going to be doing in a bit. Now if I
say false, then we can see
that if we print the (gameOver)
bool, right after here,
then what would we expect?
Pause and play and see what happens!
OK we just get false back, which is kind of what we expect,
and if we put true in here,
what do we get?
Well yes, we get true again! OK but
this is a bit boring, but what we can do is, we can actually evaluate
truth expressions. So we can do something along the
lines of, is home...
Let's see, let's do the distance.
So I'm going to move this down to here,
where we can get hold of our distance,
and I'm going to say, is the distance.magnitude
less than 1?
OK, now this is something that we
don't always know, so let's have a look and pause and
play!
So it's saying false false false false. Now if I get
closer to where I want to be,
now I'm 1 again, and that is true
all of a sudden, when we're on 0. OK, so this is very interesting,
a variable that can change between false and true.
Now, this less than 1 is interesting, the magnitude can never be less than 1.
The condition in which the game should be over is when it's equal to 1,
but we can't just use equal, because equal is used for assignment,
so we have to do ==. So we use ==
to mean return true if
this is equal to that. So I'm going to put in 0 here,
and if we run it again, we should
be getting that game over equal to true,
exactly when...
...exactly when we go down to 0, so
I find my way home again.
Here we go, true exactly when it's 0. And if I come
back to 0 again, true again. Perfect!
OK, so we now have a variable that gives us whether
the game is over or not.
So for this lecture's challenge, I would like you to print a game
over message. You're going to use an if and the bool
to print out this message, and then, I would like you, as a bonus
if you manage this, to
not print out the progress message
after the game over, so that we're not getting two messages
once. OK so pause the video and have a go at this, and have a go at the bonus if you can
manage it, but don't worry if you can't.
OK welcome back!
Let's dive right in and have a go at this!
So my first instinct is that if
must be about true and false right. These things in here must be returning
true and false, and if we have a variable which holds true and false,
then surely we can use that in the if as well. So we can say if
(gameOver), then we can
print("Game over
in "). Then, I'm going to add in the
numberOfSteps, and then
just the text  "steps.") after it.
OK, I'm going to remove that print,
and let's hit
the play. Now we need to be able
to actually finish the game, which I've been notoriously bad at so far.
And we go towards home and there we go, we have game over in 9
steps! But the problem is that we get a little message coming up after
this game over. So how do we get rid of that? Well
remember I told you about a little statement called else?
Well that essentially allows us to not do an
else if. Remember else if requires some other boolean
in here. But if we just do else, then we say
(gameOver) then do this, else do this, which makes sense.
It's like reading English. So we can just copy these two statements in here
and paste them in there. So what we now get
is we either print this or we print this and we increment the number
of steps.
Let's head into Unity and have a go at playing this!
OK so we've got our game here and I'm going to try and win
it as quickly as possible this time. OK, we've got the game over in 7
steps! And that's it, no more messages! Perfect! It looks like
we have a very nearly complete game! In the next lecture
we're going to be looking at making it a little bit more robust and doing a bit of play testing!